January 2026 AI discoveries. ThePoorGPUguy journey through the mont… | by Fabio Matricardi | Artificial INTEL-ligence Playground | Medium
https://medium.com/artificial-intel-ligence-playground/january-2026-ai-discoveries-f03d31fb49f7

Artificial INTEL-ligence Playground
January 2026 AI discoveries
ThePoorGPUguy journey through the month: ideas, projects and practical tips. Free image generation and blazing fast llama.cpp with 30B model on my crappy Laptop.
Fabio Matricardi
9 min read
·
Jan 24, 2026

I have been exploring a lot in the past month, but I have not time to write down properly an article for every new know-how I would like to share. So today I want at least to give you some bites 😁.

1) Opencode
2) Chocolatey - one tool to rule them all!
3) Llama.cpp optimization for CPU poor guy
4) Free image generation API - Pixazo.ai

If you have a poor GPU laptop (like me) but you want to use AI locally with python to run useful projects (for yourself), you are the reader, and I am writing for you. Step by step project, learning python and AI while building something practical

But… as you may know, writing is a hobby for me: I take it seriously, but I work already 12 hours a day offshore (and write in the so called free time…).

That being said, I cannot but share with you at least a preview of what is about to come: be certain that a proper article will be published soon.

Without further ado… let’s see what AI new entries in this month have brought to us!

1) Opencode

I finally tried opencode. My personal rejection to whatever was including the word agents was removed as soon as I watched a youtube video about it.

OpenCode is an open source agent that helps you write and run code with any AI model. It’s available as a terminal-based interface, desktop app, or IDE extension.

It is famous mostly for its terminal interface: cool, neat and efficient.

Opencode explores your existing project or start a new project and run the programming, testing and documentation for you. It can read existing files, create new files and directories, install dependencies and test its own code.

You have just hired… for free a programmer.

An article will come soon here on Medium, explaining you from A to Z how to start using it with Zero costs. In fact I will show you how to use opencode with the free available Zen models (grok-1, GML-4.7 and so on), with your free Openrouter.ai API key, and even with llama.cpp running your model locally.

Press enter or click to view image in full size
2) Chocolatey — one tool to rule them all!

If you build Python and AI applications on Windows, you already know the pattern: install Python, then Git, then VS Code or Sublime, then CUDA, then some obscure runtime for an LLM backend. Each one has its own website, download link, installer, and update process.

On Linux, package managers solve this problem. On Windows, Chocolatey brings that same idea to the terminal: one command-line interface to install, upgrade, and remove most of the tools you care about.

As I told you, in the past weeks I built several personal apps in python. They are useful to me. And I did it with the help of AI. To do this you need tools (back to the above section…)

opencode (the coder app that create code and all development files by itself)?
docker (to have your local AI able to use web-search)
a good code editor (maybe with AI assistant plugins)

You can read more here:

Chocolatey for Python & AI enthusiasts: how to turn Windows into your in-house developer...
How a terminal-first package manager can automate your tools, tame your installs, and make reproducible AI environments…

ai.gopubby.com

3) Llama.cpp optimization for CPU poor guy

You know that I am a big fan of llama.cpp, and that to me this project is the biggest innovation in Generative AI for the past 2 years.

I discovered few days ago a team of crazy engineers that managed to run a 30B Qwen Model with a Raspberry Pi… in Real Time!

A part from the Mission Impossible feat, the ByteShape team discovered that for CPU some quantization formats are slowing the inference time quite a lot! For example, a standard Q4 model can be slower than a Q5 (that is bigger). Using the same principle, they developed special quants that are Memory efficient.

I couldn’t believe the statements from ByteShape guys, so I decided to test them myself, and I measured the performances comparing the scores on my Laptop… I have to admit that they were right!

I will write a full article soon, for now follow me in few steps to test it on your PC too in 5 minutes.

On their Hugging Face Repository, you can find the special quantization GGUF files ready for the miracle: I tested both Qwen3–4B-Instruct-2507-GGUF and Qwen3–30B-A3B-Instruct-2507-GGUF.

Download the latest llama.cpp binaries for Windows in X64 (no GPU support or Vulkan driver support). extract them in one directory.

In the same directory download the standard Q4_K_M from the official repositories, and:

Qwen3–30B-A3B-Instruct-2507-Q3_K_S-2.70bpw.gguf
Qwen3–4B-Instruct-2507-Q3_K_S-2.77bpw.gguf

The comparison is between the standard Q4_K_M and their special BitPerWeight quantization. For both of them I took screenshots from the llama.cpp web interface using this simple prompt:

explain what is science in 5 paragraphs

from the terminal, we ensure flash-attention is on, no GPU layers and context length of 8192 tokens.

#normal quants
.\llama-server.exe -m Qwen_Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507-Q6_K.gguf -c 8192 -fa on -ngl 0
#ByteShape quants
.\llama-server.exe -m Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507-Q3_K_S-2.77bpw.gguf -c 8192 -fa on -ngl 0
Qwen_Qwen3–4B-Instruct-2507-Q6_K.gguf

prefill: 46 tokens per second

Press enter or click to view image in full size

generation: 10 tokens per second

Press enter or click to view image in full size
Qwen3–4B-Instruct-2507-Q3_K_S-2.77bpw.gguf

prefill: 64 tokens per second

Press enter or click to view image in full size

generation: 21 tokens per second

Press enter or click to view image in full size

In relation to the huge 30B-A3B, I only wanted to test how good was in prefill: this is a huge model so I was expecting a big lag time to first token, after reading a long prompt. And I have only 16Gb of RAM so I cannot accomodate a 18.7 Gb of GGUF there!

See yourself:

.\llama-server.exe -m Qwen3-30B-A3B-Instruct-2507-Q3_K_S-2.70bpw.gguf -c 8192 -fa on -ngl 0

Prefill

Press enter or click to view image in full size
530 tokens in the prompt, prefill in only 8 seconds!

Generation

Press enter or click to view image in full size
27 tokens per second

If you want to know more about llama.cpp beauties, check this article here:

llama.CPP restyle is the workshop for your Local AI
From LLM routing to full working Chat application: all in one ZIP file. And here is how.

medium.com

4) Free image generation API — Pixazo.ai

I use image generation models almost every day. I use them to visualize the content of my articles and blog posts. 1 image is worth 1000 words, when you want to understand a new concept.

In the past i shared with you several methods to use free available online tools to generate images:

I stumbled on this free tiny Image Generator — and it changed how I create
No sign-up, no tracking, just a simple link that turns words into images. I was surprised how free the web could still…

generativeai.pub

Unfortunately even my last hero (together.ai) removed the free API access to Flux.1-Schnell.

Also Nano-babana was removed from openrouter free API models.

Free image generation with OpenRouter and Gemini Nano-banana
A new pair for amazing feats!

generativeai.pub

This week I discovered Pixazo.ai

Pixazo is an online service to create AI Images, Videos and Audio Online. When you register (for free) you can get an API key (for free) and use Flux.1-Schnell.

Press enter or click to view image in full size

There are 2 more models you can access for free, with the very same single API key:

Press enter or click to view image in full size

How to use it?

Register for free and create an API key here.

Install the following dependencies:

pip install ipython pillow requests

Open your ipython and run this:

#Pixazo free API with flux-schnell
from PIL import Image
import requests
from io import BytesIO
import datetime


def download_image(image_url):
response = requests.get(image_url)
print('Image ready')
my_img = Image.open(BytesIO(response.content))
return my_img

def generate_timestamp_filename():
"""Generates a unique filename for a PNG file using the current timestamp."""
now = datetime.datetime.now()
timestamp_str = now.strftime("%Y-%m-%d_%H-%M-%S")
filename = f"{timestamp_str}_Pai_Image.png"
return filename

fname = generate_timestamp_filename()

prompt = input('/IMAGINE ')
print(f'Generating your image in file {fname}')
print('Calling the endpoint...')
url = "https://gateway.pixazo.ai/flux-1-schnell/v1/getData"

example = "Picture a sleek, futuristic car racing through a neon-lit cityscape, its engine humming efficiently as it blurs past digital billboards. The driver skillfully navigates the glowing streets, aiming for victory in this high-tech, adrenaline-fueled race of tomorrow."

headers = {
"Content-Type": "application/json",
"Cache-Control": "no-cache",
"Ocp-Apim-Subscription-Key": "xxxx" #<----YOUR PIZAZO API KEY
}

data = {
"prompt": prompt,
"num_steps": 4,
"seed": 15,
"height": 640,
"width": 1024
}

response = requests.post(url, json=data, headers=headers)
image_url = response.json()['output']
print('Downloading image...')
downloadedimage = download_image(image_url)
downloadedimage.show()
print('Saving your image...')
downloadedimage.save(fname)
print('All done!')

When you run it, a http requests is sent to the API endpoint with your prompt. You will get a byte-stream back, and Pillow will show it to you and save the image file.

Press enter or click to view image in full size
image created running on ipython the code above

You can change the size (but remember only to use multiple of 64) without exceeding the maximum size of 1024x1024.

I also created a GUI interface (using opencode !) and I put it as an executable in my GitHube repository: feel free to use it.

Press enter or click to view image in full size

The repo is here:

GitHub - fabiomatricardi/Pixazo-free-image-generation: CLI and tkinter app to generate images for…
CLI and tkinter app to generate images for free with Flux-Schnell and pixazo api …

github.com

And the executable is here:

Release First release - Windows binaries · fabiomatricardi/Pixazo-free-image-generation
CLI and tkinter app to generate images for free with Flux-Schnell and pixazo api - Release First release - Windows…

github.com

Conclusions

Got inspired or curious? That was the intention, by the way.

I will come out shortly with full articles here on Medium

I hope you enjoyed the article. If this story provided value and you wish to show a little support, you could:

Clap a lot of times for this story
Highlight the parts more relevant to be remembered (it will be easier for you to find them later and for me to write better articles)
Join my totally free weekly Substack newsletter here
Follow me on Medium
Read my latest articles at https://medium.com/@fabio.matricardi
Follow my publication https://medium.com/artificial-intel-ligence-playground

If you want to read more, here are some ideas:

Stop chasing AI benchmarks. Be the Benchmark.
In a world of endless AI releases and shiny leaderboards, the smartest strategy is simple: treat benchmarks as signals…

blog.stackademic.com

Excuse me? Llama.cpp + RWKV = Long context on cheap hardware
RWKV Strikes Back: how BlinkDL’s architecture defies the Transformer dogma

blog.stackademic.com

Don’t forget that programming is fun
When coding stops feeling like play, it becomes work — and that’s when learning stalls.

medium.com

Your AI your rules... on Linux computers
How to have your own Language Model running on a Ubuntu based Linux computer

generativeai.pub

Thepoorgpuguy
Local Gpt
Your Ai Your Rules
Python4ai
Pixazo

70

Published in Artificial INTEL-ligence Playground
