How I Boosted RAG Retrieval Recall from 50% to Over 95%
A simple yet powerful strategy to fix poor document retrieval in RAG pipelines using structured filtering and LLMs
5 min read· 4 days ago
Muhammad Haider Tallal Follow
Made with Ai
For Non Members
In this article, I’m going to teach you a few great techniques for improving retrieval in RAG (Retrieval-Augmented
Generation) applications. I used these recently in a client project to increase our system’s recall from around 50 – 60% all the
way to 95% and above.
Recall is a very important metric for any RAG application. It simply measures how well a retrieval system finds the correct
documents for a given user search or question. That, of course, strongly impacts how good our generated results are —
whether we’re building a chatbot or something similar.
Most people know this by now: if you don’t give the necessary context to the LLM, it can’t generate good results, no matter
how much prompt engineering you do at the end of the chain. So in RAG, the biggest factor — often by far — in getting
good results is good retrieval. And one way we measure that is recall.
Now, I’ll walk you through this client project in a bit of detail so you can see exactly what we did and how we achieved over
95% recall — and therefore a very reliable system.The Setup: A Classic RAG Pipeline
The Setup: A Classic RAG Pipeline | Made With AI
At a high level, this was a pretty classic RAG project. We built a chatbot for internal use — specifically for customer service
staff to find information faster.
The basic flow:
Fetch data from different customer systems and databases.
Preprocess the data: chunking, embedding, and all the usual RAG stuff.
Build a search index from those document chunks.
Connect the chatbot to that search index so users can ask questions in natural language.
The bot retrieves relevant documents from the index, then uses that to generate responses. Simple, standard RAG.
Initial Version: The Naive Approach
Our first naive version looked something like this:
On the indexing side:
We cleaned up the data from different systems.
Chunked it into smaller pieces.
Created embeddings for vector search.
Loaded those chunks and embeddings into a vector database (Azure AI Search in this case).We had all kinds of data, but for this example, we’ll focus on two document types: locations and experts.
This client was in the spa and wellness space. They had:
Locations like spas and gyms, each with descriptions including services (e.g. treatments, massages), machines, city,
and region.
Experts like massage therapists and personal trainers, with similar service descriptions.
We joined all the relevant fields (description, city, region) into one content field for text search. We also created
embeddings of that field for vector search.
visual comparing ‘Locations’ and ‘Experts’ as unified content documents — designed for clarity and clean indexing |made with ai
On the frontend:
Users would type something like:
”Swedish massage in Helsinki”
Then we’d run that query as either:
A vector search against the content vector field, or
A full-text BM25 search against the content field.
We tried both — but both had problems.
Why It Didn’t WorkCompare BM25 vs vector search results made with ai
Vector Search
This was a total no-go.
While vector search is great for fuzzy matching and semantic similarity, in our case we needed exact matches — for both
services and locations.
Instead, vector search would return similar services or cities (like other massages or other capitals in Finland) but not
exactly what the user asked for. Not helpful.
BM25
Slightly better, but still not good.
BM25 ranks documents based on the frequency of search terms. That sounds okay until you realize that:
A document with many mentions of “massage” and a random “Swedish meatballs” mention might rank higher than an
actual Helsinki spa that does Swedish massage — just because of term frequency.
It doesn’t prioritize exact matches, which was our main need.
Other Issues
We also ran into:
Conjugation issues — especially since the project was in Finnish. For example, “in Helsinki” is conjugated in different
ways, and if the conjugation didn’t match the user query exactly, BM25 wouldn’t find it
The Fix: Structured Search with LLM Assistance
Here’s how we fixed it and boosted recall to over 95%.
Step 1: Modify the IndexWe added a new field to the search index: services, as a structured list rather than embedding them in the freeform
description.
But this data wasn’t directly available — so we used an LLM to extract services during indexing.
For example, from a location or expert description, we’d prompt the LLM to generate:
services: ["Swedish massage", "facial", "deep tissue massage"]
We then removed the vector embeddings altogether — they weren’t useful for our needs.
Step 2: Transform the Query
This was the real game-changer.
Instead of passing the user’s raw query directly into search, we now used an LLM to structure the query into a format like
this:
{  "city.fi": "Helsinki",  "services": ["Swedish massage"]}
That way, we could run a precise filter query on city and services fields — getting only the documents that matched
exactly.
Show how query is transformed and indexed with structure made with aiThe Results
We ran another round of user testing after implementing these changes, and the results were clear:
Recall jumped from 50 – 60% to nearly 100%.
Most previous issues were resolved.
Only a few edge cases remained, mostly due to poor data quality.
Display the recall improvement visually made with ai
Trade-Offs
Of course, there were a few trade-offs:1. Indexing is now more expensive, since we use an LLM to extract services. But this tool was built for hundreds of
internal users — saving them thousands of hours — so it was well worth the cost.
2. Slight latency on the frontend. We added one extra LLM interaction to structure the query before retrieval. But it’s fast:
short inputs and outputs, and we used a small model here.
Final Thoughts
This was a big win, achieved with relatively simple and intuitive changes.
Sometimes you don’t need agentic RAG or other trendy techniques from undergrad research papers. You just need to
clearly understand your actual issues.
In our case, users needed exact matches for specific service-location queries. That pointed us toward structured filtering
as the solution.
And while RAG usually means retrieval augments generation, it also works the other way around. There are all kinds of
clever ways to use LLMs to build better retrieval.
Hope that was helpful — and I’ll see you in the next one.
By Muhammad Haider Tallal
Open in app
